.TH USERS-HOME-RESTORE 8 "February 2026" "Remedia" "System Administration"

.SH NAME
users-home-restore — restoring access to user home directories after reinstalling Ubuntu

.SH DESCRIPTION
After reinstalling Ubuntu or manually restoring the /home partition, user accounts are recreated, and each user is assigned a new UID.

Home directories
.BR /home/USERNAME
may remain:
.IP \(bu 2
owned by
.B root:root
.IP \(bu 2
owned by an old UID that no longer exists.

The system intentionally does not automatically change data ownership,
since it cannot know who exactly owns it.

This document describes a safe, deliberate, and canonical procedure
for diagnosing and restoring user home directories.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
getent passwd USERNAME
ls -ld /home/USERNAME
stat /home/USERNAME

chown -R USERNAME:USERNAME /home/USERNAME
.fi

.SH SYMPTOMS
Typical symptoms:
.IP \(bu 2
user cannot log in
.IP \(bu 2
empty desktop
.IP \(bu 2
file access errors
.IP \(bu 2
Applications don't save settings
.IP \(bu 2
messages
.BR "Permission denied"
.IP \(bu 2
failed to restore user data in Remedia

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Checking user existence:
.RS
.nf
getent passwd USERNAME
.fi
.RE

Expected result:
.RS
.nf
USERNAME:x:1000:1000:...:/home/USERNAME:/bin/bash
.fi
.RE
Note the UID and path to the home directory.

Checking directory owner:
.RS
.nf
ls -ld /home/USERNAME
.fi
.RE

or

.RS
.nf
stat /home/USERNAME
.fi
.RE

After running the commands, compare the user UID
and the directory owner.

Typical problem states:
.TP
.B root:root
user does not have access to the home directory
.TP
.B old\ UID
hidden incompatibility between the account and the directory owner
.TP
.B empty\ directory
possible mounting error
.BR /home

.SH RECOVERY
.SS "Check before restore"
.IP \(bu 2
user exists
.IP \(bu 2
directory is located exactly in
.BR /home/USERNAME
.IP \(bu 2
data actually belongs to this user

.SS "Correct owner"
.RS
.nf
chown -R USERNAME:USERNAME /home/USERNAME
.fi
.RE
This command is only applicable selectively.

.SH WARNINGS
Never execute
.BR "chown -R /home" .
Without careful verification, this can lead to irreversible data loss
and compromise the integrity of the system.

.SH SAFETY\ RULES
Any tools or scripts should fail if:
.IP \(bu 2
username
.B root
.IP \(bu 2
directory is not in
.BR /home
.IP \(bu 2
user does not exist
.IP \(bu 2
path is empty or looks suspicious

.SH AUTOMATION\ POLICY
Only two automation modes are allowed:
.IP \(bu 2
.B audit
— audit and report (default)
.IP \(bu 2
.B fix
— fix by explicit flag and confirmation

Automatic fix without diagnostics is prohibited.

.SH INTEGRATION
This procedure is canonical for the Reimedia and is used as:
.IP \(bu 2
basis for recovery scripts
.IP \(bu 2
checklist after a system reinstall
.IP \(bu 2
explanation of Ubuntu architectural behavior

.SH NOTES
Reinstalling a system isn't about losing data,
it's about understanding who owns it.

.SH SEE ALSO
chown(1), stat(1), getent(1), passwd(5)

.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Reincarnation Backup Kit Project

.PP
.SH STATUS
Canonical / Stable
